The problem with housing is that we
haven't found a way to offshore it to
China. If we did, then probably housing
would have gotten cheaper like
everything with everything else that we
have manufactured there.
>> There actually are companies that like
try to do this stuff in China. They
would like manufacture these modules.
But again, to my point about, you know,
you incur all these extra costs. You
know, they have to they have to break
them into modules and put them on these
boats and bring them over. So, it's you
know, it's a very sort of niche
business.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, you're a
homeowner now, right? Yeah, it's really
fun. Uh tell me tell me how fun it is. I
know you've had a few issues that
cropped up basically as soon as you
bought your new place. I don't want to
talk about it. Let's go let's move on.
No, it's a
>> this is part of my carefully planned
intro.
>> Yes, I know. Um yeah, it's it's annoying
and you have to deal with stuff and I I
may have mentioned on the show one time.
Actually, I've been lucky by and large.
>> Mhm.
By Yes, it was very funny, you know, the
thing literally the day or 2 days after
we closed on my apartment in the East
Village. You know, it's like what was
something wrong before? You just there's
just the phone number of someone you
called the like yeah, the we still the
building still has a super, but you
know, the landlord just deals with
replacing something and then I think
literally the day after we closed, there
was like a window leak and it's like
wait, is there no longer a number? Do I
have to pay for this myself?
>> So, who did you find to fix the window?
Okay, I don't remember. That I don't
remember. That probably I think there is
still a super in the building and the
super but we had to write a check. Okay,
one of the things that has surprised me
about being a homeowner is I'm thinking
how to frame this, but like how low-tech
a lot of the housing construction and
fixing actually is, right? So, you know,
if there's a leak in your ceiling in
your roof or something, it's literally
either you or some guy that you hire
going up on a ladder and like putting
down a few more shingles with a nail
gun, right? It all seems very Well, what
did you think was going to happen? Well,
I don't know. I was like going to be
like some like unitry like robot that
like crawled up there.
>> No, seriously, it's the year 2025 and
we're still putting houses together with
like, you know, hammers and someone
someone comes with a box and they look
through the different like no, this
doesn't fit. This doesn't fit. Oh, I got
it. And then they're like one second, I
don't have the right screw and then they
go around to a you know, in the city.
You know, they go around to a
construction store. I'll be right back.
I go I got this. I got yeah. Yeah, it's
still pretty probably the way it looked
when we were kids. Okay, well, anyway,
I've been thinking about it because a
couple months ago the Richmond Fed put
out this paper and it was all about
productivity in housing construction and
the fact that construction labor
productivity in housing has fallen by
more than 30% from 1970 to 2020. So, you
think about the arc of economic
development. You know, normally there
are productivity improvements as we
invent new efficiencies and as we invent
new technology and ways of making
things. That hasn't happened in housing.
It's still the guy, you know, showing up
with a toolbox.
>> This strikes me as a really important
element of the housing affordability
conversation that I don't think gets
enough attention, which is it's easy to
talk about zoning and I'm sure there are
issues there that need reform. It's easy
to you know, permits and all that stuff.
It's easy to talk about financing etc.
However,
housing is a product and
you know, things get built at a cost and
then sold at some profit margin above
that. And if that underlying cost keeps
going up and it definitely has in say
New York City and other areas, if that
underlying cost keeps going up, then
that is going to push up the cost of
housing regardless of what you do on
Now, again, like maybe zoning can make
help with productivity gains etc.
Nonetheless, it continues to get more
expensive for the actual construction of
a home unlike many other built goods. I
mean, the issue is that we don't build
homes in China, unfortunately. If we
did, that would solve the problem. We
don't. we could talk a little bit about
why we don't, but maybe one day we will,
but that would help a lot. Well, on that
note, I mean, there have been attempts
through history to have prefab houses,
right? And some of the old prefab houses
that you order from like the Sears
catalog in the 1920s or 1930s, those are
gorgeous and I would happily live in one
of those today. But we should talk about
why it seems difficult to build houses
or at least more expensive than some
other things and also why it seems that
manufacturing other products seems to
get more efficient over time uh while
housing seems to kind of stagnate. All
right, so we do in fact have the perfect
guest. I'm very happy to say we have
Brian Potter who is the author of the
construction physics newsletter on
Substack. I subscribe to this and it's
fantastic. He's also the author of the
new book The Origins of Efficiency and a
senior infrastructure fellow at IFP. So,
really the perfect guest. Brian, thank
you so much for coming on the show.
Thanks for having me. Um congrats on the
book Origins of Efficiency. Are we right
in thinking that housing hasn't become
that much more efficient of a process?
>> You are correct and you know, the
productivity metrics, there's those
metrics are quite complicated and you
can measure in different ways and
different things so slightly different
trends. Some of them just show flat
productivity rather than
falling productivity. But the general
point is yeah, yes, it has not improved
unlike almost every sort of other like
physical good has gotten, you know,
cheaper and less expensive to make over
time. Housing is not like that at all.
And you you worked for several years for
a
prefab housing company or something like
that?
>> Yeah, my background is in as an
engineer. I worked as a structural
engineer for about 15 years. That's what
my training is and just that is
basically just designing buildings. So,
I designed parking garages and water
treatment plants and apartment buildings
and and stuff like that. Um and I had
yeah, worked at different facets of the
industry and as you say, it it seemed
extremely inefficient to me. These, you
know, we're putting up these buildings,
we're putting up these houses, you know,
on site by hand with a guy with a
hammer. You know, it doesn't look that
different than it did 100 years ago.
We're you know, on my side it was like
we're designing these buildings from
scratch every single time instead of
designing it once and then making, you
know, a million copies of it like you do
with a car or something like that. So,
yeah, it seemed when I was, you know,
much younger, it seemed like incredibly
backward and and inefficient to me. And
then in about 2018, I had a chance to
join an extremely well-funded
construction prefab startup called
Katerra that would paid, you know,
promised like oh, we're going to come
in. We've raised all this money. We're
going to change all that. We're going to
build buildings in in factories and it's
going to be so much more efficient.
We're going to be the Henry Ford of
housing and we're just going to sweep
away these old methods of of of
building. And uh it
long story short, it did not work out at
all. They had raised a very very large
amount of venture capital about like two
or three billion dollars in in VC and
they burned through it in a few years
and and declared bankruptcy. Oh dear. Um
and then they yeah, and in the aftermath
of that, I wanted to understand why had
it all gone so wrong beyond just, you
know, startups are hard. Startups have a
high, you know, a naturally high failure
rate.
Um
uh you know, and whatever operational
missteps they may have made cuz I you
know, I I kind of came to believe that
their sort of fundamental thesis that if
you build these things in in factories
like we build everything else, it will
get cheaper. I came to believe that was
either sort of not quite correct or at
least missing a very big piece. That we
didn't know specifically what we needed
to do in these in these factories to
make the costs fall.
>> So, why are houses I guess so customized
and not standardized to your point? Uh
yeah, so there's a lot of reasons. One
is just, you know, to go back to your
point about permitting. There's a very
very large number of uh permitting
jurisdictions in the US, something like
20,000 different jurisdictions which
each might have their own, you know,
slightly different versions of of
building codes that need to sort of need
to be enforced.
Um there's just, you know, different
building sites are different sizes and
shapes and have different, you know,
soils which require a different
different things, different
environmental design factors, you know,
different wind speeds. If you're in
California, you need to design for
earthquakes. If you need in Florida, you
need design for hurricanes. So, there's
all these factors that kind of
um
conspire to uh make the sort of housing
market very kind of fragmented and it's
hard to build a very very large number
of like a uniform product. The builders
do try to do that. They have somewhat
standardized designs that they'll plunk
down in like different developments
across the country, but it's
it's it's quite difficult to do in in
really really large numbers.
Talk to us a little bit more about
prefab housing specifically or housing
in a
a factory. What was the I mean, you
there have been multiple attempts and as
Tracy mentioned, it's existed for
actually a long time and you used to be
able to buy a home from Sears. Talk a
little bit about the sort of recent
trends in this area because you do over
the last several years, you've heard a
lot of and maybe the last decade, you've
heard a lot of
excitement about this idea. And as you
mentioned, you worked for a well-funded
startup. Why now? Like what's the
general thinking and then maybe we could
get into the sort of the gap between the
theory and then what happened in
practice? Yeah, so prefab is like this
perennially popular idea.
It's always it's always next
Yeah, it's always the next big thing
that's going to come along. And so
every, you know, decade or two, you will
kind of see these these trends like some
big, you know, company will come along
and say oh, I'm going to revolutionize
the building with with the housing
industry with you know, prefab
construction. So, and yeah, these these
attempts,
you know, stretch back a pretty long
way. So, right after
you know, and I I became something of a
student of of these companies that have
tried and and failed. So, right after
World War II, you have this this company
called the
called the Lustron Home Company, which
made these very interesting homes, many
of which are still around. You can
actually go go look at them.
But they're made of these like steel
panels covered in porcelain that turned
out to be quite well-made and quite
durable, but the company went and they
got government financing to sort of fund
their operation. They had set up shop in
this big what was once one time the
biggest factory in the world. It was a
repurposed aircraft engine factory. But
they look pretty cool.
>> Yeah, they're very they're very neat.
There's I live in Atlanta and there's
some in Atlanta that you can go and look
at. Um but they went bankrupt after a
quite a few years in the 1960s. There
was this company called Sterling Homex
that said, "Oh, we're going to be the
they we're going to be the next you know
Henry Ford of construction." They went
bankrupt in a few years.
>> a good patter.
>> Yeah, they were a part of this
government program called Operation
Breakthrough, which was trying to fund
um you know just again fund the
development of like mass production
housing techniques. That program
basically failed. None of their
companies that they funded in their
quite a few of them ended up sort of
succeeding in breaking through and and
creating sort of these mass produced
housing
products. So you kind of see the same
thing happening over and over and over
again where people are trying to use
prefab to like dramatically reduce the
cost of construction. And there's ways
that you can do that in kind of like a
very limited sense. Um and you can also
like build a successful business off of
prefab where you're not necessarily
trying to compete on low cost, but
things like oh we can build much faster
or or stuff like that. But nobody has
managed to do what everybody is trying
to do, which is like you know be the
Henry Ford of housing. Okay, what's the
sticking point then? I know you walked
through some of the reasons that houses
tend to be customized, things like soil
types and zoning and regulation, but is
is that just the story of why we can't
have prefab houses that are like across
America? So there's yeah I kind of look
at this in in two ways. I I think of it
in terms of it's very hard to introduce
some of these like improvements, these
sort of strategies you have for
improving efficiency into the
construction process without
accumulating like more cost elsewhere in
the process. And so at the same time
that that is you know these the gains
that we found in terms of like these
strategies for efficiency improvement
have historically been much more limited
than you see in like if you're producing
you know a car or a light bulb or
something like that. And at the same
time we've continually added like more
regulations and more difficulty, you
know, more administrative overhead in
getting stuff built, which is slowly
like driving up up the cost even as like
we're getting
you know we're not sort of accumulating
these productivity improvements. What's
an example of okay, this on paper looks
like productivity gain that we get in a
factory, but then you pay for it
somewhere else. Sure. So you know a very
simple example, you know, if you're
building a car in a factory, you build
the entire car, right? It rolls out of
the factory line and the car is
complete. A building is too big to come
out of the factory all in one piece and
cuz you know get
sent to the job site or whatever. So
what happens is you have to sort of
build your building in chunks. You know,
that's why prefab construction is often
called modular construction cuz you
build it in these modules.
>> Yeah.
>> for like you know how you break a
building into modules, but you're always
like breaking it into these pieces. And
what that what happens when you break it
into pieces is that you have to add a
bunch of extra stuff that you wouldn't
have had to add if you were just
building it on site. So transporting it
down the road, you have to sort of
design that to be rigid enough to like
not collapse under like the load of like
being bounced along on a truck. I used
to work at a company that built um
concrete parking garages, which are
built from prefabricated, you know,
materials. They build these like big
concrete pieces and then drive them down
the road. And that was like the design
that was like the controlling factor is
designing to survive the loads that it
would incur during transportation. And
then once you have those pieces
driven you know driven down and gotten
to the job site, you have to like stitch
them together. And so you have all these
extra connectors and there's extra
complexity in attaching them together
that again doesn't exist in sort of the
conventional construction process. It's
kind of crazy to think that whether
we're talking about a house or a parking
garage that's presumably designed to
last for decades that are very
significant
factor in engineering is that few hours
that it goes down the road. I mean
that's what it sounds like. Yeah, like
the that's like that's going to last
forever, but it has to be there just for
that like that short transport period.
>> In the case of parking garages for sure.
I guess that's why we do have some
prefab houses in the US and they're
called trailers cuz you can actually
move them. Right. Um okay, on this note,
how much of this is also maybe a
liability question where if you were
producing prefab houses, presumably it's
not the company that's putting them
together on site. It's usually
contractors or someone you hire to do
it. And I imagine there's like a
disconnect between
the contractors on the ground who are
putting the stuff together and the
company that's building the parts.
>> There is to to some extent I think that
specific liability is not the is not
necessarily the biggest controlling
factor. What is a big controlling factor
and I've written an essay about this is
that
the sort of construction cost, like the
cost of in in developing and putting up
a new building, the sort of distribution
of that is extremely fat tailed and
right skewed. Which so basically what
that what that means is that a
construction project that goes under
budget, that goes really really really
well, maybe you're like 10% over budget
under budget, maybe you're 15% under
budget. You know, you can't push down
that cost very much. But a project that
goes over budget can be 100 or 200 or
300% over budget. So what that means is
that there's so the you know the risk
involved in like introducing some new
system that you're not sure really how
it works
it just it's the payoff is so
asymmetrical. It's so much more likely
to cause like a massive overrun than to
sort of save a relatively small amount
that these sort of builders are like
rationally incentivized to not introduce
some radically new technology that's
going to dramatically change how things
go because the potential cost are so
extremely high. For the sort of maybe
dovetailing with Tracy's question, you
know, or maybe in the case of Katerra or
some of these others, it's like okay,
they have some vision,
but because they're not doing the entire
thing all around the country including
presumably transport etc. How much is
the issue like
maybe scale on those ends, experience
with that? Like in theory if you had a
really big experienced on the ground
distribution and sort of final assembly
workforce
or whatever it is, like how much would
that help and how much is the issue that
people who work on the ground etc. just
aren't doing this full time? Yeah,
that's a part of it is like you know
this modular construction is kind of a
somewhat yeah niche aspect of the
construction industry. There are you
know quite a few experts in it that know
how to do it and they do it fairly
regularly and you can usually find them
in like any given market I would say. To
kind of
you know a different point that you kind
of alluded to, scale is like another
definitely big issue where it's like
it's not like a semiconductor where you
can make a million of them in a factory
in Taiwan and ship them all over the
world, right? That's another big aspect
that makes it hard to sort of you get
gain efficiencies from
from factory production and and goes to
what I was talking about where it's hard
to do that without introducing cost
elsewhere in the system. The the cost of
like moving these modules around is so
large
that it's typically not economic to ship
it like more than a day's drive because
then the cost just get so high. And so
what you have instead of like one giant
factory that can like produce you know
at really really hard large scales,
these even even sort of these modular
companies that are doing like large
amounts of business, they all tend to be
like done in factories like that are
spread across the US.
>> factory.
>> Yeah, so like you you talked about like
trailers, like manufactured homes, which
is one area that you can actually see
some pretty substantial cost reductions
due to various things. Partly it's like
they're targeting a lower end of the
market and stuff like that. So like the
finishes and stuff aren't quite as nice.
But if you look at like the way that
their business is structured, they have
like
more than a dozen factories spread all
across the US and then each one is
serving like a day's drive catchment
area. So they're not building like
you know 50,000 houses or whatever in
one factory. It's more it's closer to
like 500 or 1,000 or something in in one
factory. And so the economies of scale
that you can capture in like a given
operation are just fairly limited.
Joe, I have to mention here we didn't
tell Brian that we were going to be
talking about housing construction and
trailers and all of that. This is all
just off the top of his head. So
pretty impressive.
>> sat down and we're like, "By the way,
can we talk about this?"
Yeah. Um okay, you kind of alluded to it
in your previous answer, but if you were
going to choose a manufacturing process
that was the polar opposite of housing,
what would it be? Oh, interesting. Uh
probably something like chemical
manufacturing, you know, or like you
know, raw material manufacturing,
something like you know, steel or
something like that. Cuz chemical
manufacturing it it's you know, the sort
of ultimate form of like a manufacturing
process, which I I kind of talk about in
the book, is what's called like a
continuous flow process where it's it
just like continuously transforms your
your group of inputs into the output of
what you're doing just one you know,
continuously without any sort of
waiting, interrupt interrupting or
batching or or anything like that. It
just all flows and is continuously
transformed during the process. And
that's what like chemical manufacturing
is is you know, very efficient chemical
manufacturing is is done. And most other
like really efficient manufacturing
processes, they ultimately try to sort
of converge on something that looks like
that. So like the assembly line and like
mass production is kind of a way to like
get something that approaches like a
continuous flow process in these like
very complex manufactured goods with
like thousands of parts. That was why it
was such a huge that's a huge
transformative thing is cuz now you
could have this continuous flow process
which existed before for you know much
simpler things, but now you could adapt
that to like these really really complex
goods like cars. And that's why it was
such a transformative thing when it was
sort of invented in the early 20th
century.
Um I'm curious, does the do the
economics or the diseconomics of
building houses
in this way do they inform your
perspective at all on the prospect for
small modular nuclear reactors? I mean
there sounds like there are some
similarities especially when it comes to
like learning curves etc. Or the soil of
where you're building.
>> have any views on that industry having
come Do you think there's any parallels?
So yeah, I've been
>> Cuz this is also something that is
always the next decade away, right? Yeah
yeah yeah. So yeah, so so I talk about
economies of of scale in the book and
we're talking about like nuclear stuff.
There's like kind of two related
economies of scale that in some ways
kind of pull in different directions.
One is called and you see this with like
other sort of processing equipment which
is I call geometric scaling which is
basically as you build a piece of
equipment physically larger, it costs
less per unit of whatever it is in that
you're producing. Basically because of
like area volume relationships, as you
double the volume of something, you less
than double the amount of like surface
area required to enclose it and be that
like tanks or pipes or stuff like that.
So like chemical processing equipment or
like power plant equipment
tends to get cheaper per unit of what
you're producing up to a a certain
point. And eventually you run it gets
you run into difficulties and those
scaling laws stop working.
And this is one reason why power plants
you know in electricity got cheaper over
sort of most of the course of the 20th
century is because we're building these
power plants physically larger.
But with nuclear you run into these very
nasty diseconomies of scale around the
same thing which is because as a nuclear
plant gets bigger
the accidents they could have get more
dangerous. For like a very small reactor
you can't you can make it so you
basically can't have a meltdown. There's
just not enough heat in there to like
melt through your container or whatever.
Um but for a very large one the heat
gets so large of that you know it um
ends up being
the accidents become the risk becomes
much much larger. And so you have to
have these like very involved safety
systems that maybe you don't need to
have on like a smaller reactor. So
that's go you know that is something
that maybe points to
points to a reason why these may be
small modular reactors were better. Plus
as you say now you're getting it's sort
of the benefits of like getting yeah
series production and you know repeating
it over and over and over again.
But there is that trade-off is that
you're not getting those geometric
effects that traditionally like a lot of
this like processing type equipment has
relied on to get cheaper. This actually
reminds me of something I wanted to ask
not necessarily about nuclear but just
manufacturing in general. When I think
about efficiencies, I think about stuff
like you know reducing costs as much as
as possible maybe just in time inventory
management and stuff like that.
The problem is that if something goes
wrong, there's very very little cushion
for protection. And I'm curious when it
comes to efficiency, how do people
balance streamlining production with I
guess building in redundancies in case
the worst happens? Yeah, that's that's
really interesting and
the Toyota production system slash lean
which is like a descendant of it which I
talk a lot about in the book
is kind of an interesting balance of of
these two things cuz everybody thinks
you know lean or Toyota production
system it's like oh yeah just in time
get rid of inventories. You don't have
all the costs, you know your factories
can be smaller blah blah blah.
But really what it is it's sort of it's
sort of a balance of like for every
factor that you can control try to like
have like the you know the flow be like
as smooth as possible and
you know eliminate all this like you
know slack and waste in the system. But
for the things that like you can't
control, you should have your system
adaptable to sort of you know
accommodate that and be have sort of a
flexibility built into it. So like one
example is
after the sort of you know to bring it
back to nuclear after I believe the sort
of Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan,
Toyota had
a ran into like a shortage of like
automotive semiconductors for a while
and they realized that this was like a
big like potential like just bottleneck
in their process. So after that they
even though they're like so focused on
you know inventory minimization and
whatever, after that accident they
basically decided they were going to
like stockpile certain critical things
that maybe you know had you know
difficult lead times or something like
that. And so they stockpiled like
certain automotive semiconductors.
And so during COVID when all of a sudden
these like
you know there was all of a sudden a
huge like shortage of like automotive
semiconductors, Toyota for a while was
like much less affected by some of these
other these other car manufacturers
because they had learned the lesson that
oh yeah in sort of you know logistics
crunches these semiconductors can be
quite difficult to get. And so
you know basically people were saying
hey I thought you were all about like
inventory minimization or whatever. But
then somebody you know some spokesman
basically responds like no this is
basically a standard lean solution where
it's
[Music]
you know you try to deal you try to you
know minimize the things you know the
sort of waste in the sort of areas that
you can control. But in the stuff that
you can't control you need to sort of
adapt your system to accommodate it.
America seems to have gotten cuz I'm
trying to understand sort of big picture
the trajectories in this country for
various things. You know I joked in the
beginning the problem with housing is
that we haven't found a way to offshore
it to China. If we did then probably
housing would have gotten cheaper like
everything with everything else that we
have manufactured there. But I'm curious
do you have like a theory cuz I have
heard a satisfactory answer. Why the US
seems to have gone backwards in plane
construction? Like why does Boeing seem
to be worse at the job of building an
airplane than it was say 20 years ago?
Yeah that's interesting. One point about
your
housing construction in China. There
actually are companies that like try to
do this stuff in China. They would like
manufacture these modules. But again to
my point about you know you incur all
these extra costs. You know they have to
they have to break them into modules and
put them on these boats and bring them
over. So it's you know it's a very sort
of niche business.
In terms of Boeing, I mean the standard
you know story there is that you know
they went into this merger with
McDonnell Douglas. The finance people I
don't like the standard story. And
here's why because I love it so much,
right? And so that it's like oh this is
such a good story. It's too perfect.
They brought in the finance people they
care about the shareholders too much.
Looking at the Boeing stock chart you
would not think this is a company that
cares a lot about shareholders. Right?
They care about shareholders too much
and if they had just stuck with the
engineers. I love that story and because
it feeds all of my biases, I'm like
skeptical. Yeah and I mean you know I a
big part of it is just manufacturing
commercial aircraft is like extremely
hard. There's like a reason that only
like right now two maybe three maybe
four companies in the in the entire
world do it. Boeing Airbus Embraer in
Brazil of all places and then Comac is
looks like it's going to be the big
fourth one. You know Japan tried for
many years to sort of break into the
commercial aircraft manufacturing
market and they were basically you know
after spending like billions of dollars
they were basically gave up just because
it was so difficult. There used to be
many more competitors in the 1970s and
they sort of got winnowed down one by
one you know
one or two you know plane projects that
don't pan out and you're basically out
of business. That's essentially what
happened to Lockheed.
Um
and so it's just a very very difficult
business to sort of be in. And so Boeing
is having a lot of struggles right now.
But you know earlier in the 20th 21st
century you have Airbus having a lot of
struggles. They had all sorts of
problems
I think on their A380 that they were
rolling out. They had like a lot of
delays and stuff they had to fix on it
as well. So a big part of it is just
it's a very difficult business to to be
in. There's very few people that can
kind of really do it effectively. Here's
a question that I've wondered about and
then maybe it relates to planes and
maybe it relates to housing maybe it
relates to other things. Like if when
you see us going backwards or stalling
out. Like here's my question. Could we
have some sort of I don't know if Dutch
disease is the right answer where it's
like maybe in the middle of the 20th
century there were people who were
really you know working on the floor or
working in management at Boeing in a
plant somewhere in Washington who were
really on the ball and really
whatever. And now in that same person in
could make 10 times as much money
working for a startup in Silicon Valley
or Wall Street etc. That there's some
sort of like levels of you know
awareness or skill or agenticness or
whatever etc. And that because we have
these other areas where there's so much
money that there's like a type of
individual who used to maybe work in a
sort of construction related field that
left that and then it's changed the
talent distribution with that. Yeah, I
think that's definitely part of it.
There's like a you know theory in
certain circles that we've just we've
gotten like in a sense too good at like
allocating talent efficiently or
whatever. So like somebody extremely
like talented and smart it's like okay
we're going to send you to be a software
developer or an AI programmer or work in
finance or whatever and you're you know
there's going to be your the value that
you contribute there is going to be very
highly rewarded. But what that means is
like there's you know there's fewer
people going into sort of these other um
other sort of, you know, engineering
disciplines. I worked as a structural
engineer and which and it which is, you
know, it plays reasonably well, but it
doesn't, you know, not, you know,
Silicon Valley software developer
salary. And I used to sort of tell very
young engineers or engineers thinking
about uh you know, in in college or
whatever, I used to say, you know, if
you're smart enough to be a structural
engineer, you're smart enough to, you
know, switch to like software software
development and make a lot more money
and have a much less stressful job.
Yeah.
>> Um I've I There's like There's like This
is I think one part of the reason um why
uh, you know, Bell Labs, the very famous
AT&T R&D lab that had all, you know, the
US invention factory for most of the
20th century, um why it would be very
hard to have a sort of organization like
that today is because the quality of
talent that is a you could a place like
that demanded would be so much more
rewarding somewhere
>> $100 million deals, yeah. somewhere
else. Just quickly on aircraft. It's not
like the US doesn't have a history of
producing like large-scale amounts of
planes. And the example that everyone
tends to turn to is in World War II,
right? We produced, I think, hundreds
and thousands of aircraft very, very
quickly. What were the conditions that
existed back then that allowed us to
ramp up that kind of production so fast?
Yeah, I've I've written about uh yeah,
aircraft manufacturing during World War
II. The US actually built more airplanes
during World War II than have actually
been built uh during for commercial
purposes for the entire history of
aviation.
>> It's uh because we built, you know, so
many of them and not that many
commercial aircraft uh get built. Um I
think a big part of it is just the US
was just such a huge manufacturing power
at like the mid-20th century. You know,
we weren't building very large amounts
of airplanes, but we were building, you
know, we were building more cars than
anybody else. We were building more
machine tools than anybody else. We were
making more steel than anybody else. The
US was like, you know, the China of
today. It was like the by far the
largest manufacturing country in the
world. And so, we just had the ability
to sort of
redirect this um manufacturing
capability and talent into sort of these
these new industries. I think that was a
a very large part of it. You know,
people think about it's maybe since
we're talking about war, we're talking
about the US is the China of the 20th
century. We're just kind of
>> It sounds very Eric Adams, doesn't it?
The US is the China of the 20th century.
>> century. Can there be more than one
global manufacturing hub? Cuz when you
think about economies of scale and you
think about network effect, you know,
it's like how many other cities in the
US have tried to be the San Francisco or
the Silicon Valley? And they've never
you really never replicated. When you
think about sort of agglomeration and
network effects, etc., and you think
about what it takes for manufacturing,
and you think about, okay, now in the
21st century China is the China of the
21st century.
And you think about the efforts at US
sort of reindustrialization cuz there's
all this angst about whatever we can't
build advanced things. It's a Well, can
we have advanced things if we don't also
do the simple things like washing
machines, etc.? Like can there be more
than one in the world at any given time
or does market logic sort of dictate
that one will be the powerhouse? Yeah,
that's a really interesting question.
And so, the I I first answer is that I
don't know. And And the sec- the second
answer is I think historically kind of
what you see is that like transportation
costs have kind of been
a, you know, something of a barrier to
preventing one uh country from like just
dominating production of a certain
thing. So, even like when, you know, in
the in the '80s and and '90s when
Japanese like car manufacturers were
like trouncing the US, it it was still
so expensive to like ship them from
Japan or whatever that you you know,
they still it was still valuable to like
set up local manufacturing operations um
in the US. They still wanted to build
their plants in in in the US to sort of
make it not so expensive to sort of
transport these things. Um so, I wonder
if like as transporta- you know,
transportation has gotten more and more
inexpensive, I wonder if that has like
shifted the logic of this and you can
have this sort of like concentration of
production in a way that maybe it wasn't
quite didn't quite make sense to do uh
before when like these transportation
costs bit a little bit harder. I don't
know, but it's a interesting way of
quite a interesting question. Uh just
going back to Boeing for a second. So,
we talked about the classic story of
what went wrong at Boeing and it's that
tension between, I guess, the
manufacturers on the ground and the
executives in the boardroom who are
trying to cut costs and boost the share
price and things like that. Is that Is
that like
a trend or a thing that you tend to see
across manufacturing where the
manufacturers are constantly under
pressure from the finance exacts on the
top? Or are there companies out there
who have like cracked that relationship
where finance and manufacturers
engineers kind of work together?
Yeah, um I think, you know, the pressure
definitely seems to be, you know,
constant pushing to find uh you know,
lower sort you know, lower costs um and
which is one reason why, you know, the
trend in the second half of the 20th
century was like just outsourcing,
finding new places to sort of make this
stuff that is uh
you know, cheaper. I talk about a Nike
in the book and they're sort of an
interesting path that Nike takes where
it's like constantly hunting the the
cheapest sources of labor where they
start out They start out manufacturing
somewhere cheap, right? They start out
manufacturing their shoes in Japan
because it's much cheaper to make them
there than in than in the US. But then
as
Japanese labor starts getting more
expensive, they move their manufacturing
to Taiwan. And then from Taiwan to
China. I think now it's almost all done
in like uh Vietnam and Indonesia. So,
it's just constant hunt for the new
sources of labor. And you see that just
broadly across industries. Like um where
New York which used to be sort of a
uh you know, a a garment manufacturing
center. But as New York labor got more
and more expensive, they moved, you
know, across first, you know, out of
state into North New Jersey and then to
the south and then over over overseas.
So, there's this constant pressure. But
then there's also companies that have
like, I think, bucked that trend and
been, you know, more like, we think the
returns from like investing in our
workforce and its capabilities um
is going to be valuable enough that
we're going to do it. I think, you know,
a company like Nucor, which is a steel
company in the US, which is like very
sort of famous in terms of like how it
invests in its workforce and things like
that. And they've been extremely
successful in doing that. They grew from
nothing to be the the largest steel
manufacturer in the US, I believe.
That just reminded me something that I
really want an answer to and you might
actually have it. Why are communists
obsessed with steel?
Oh.
Good question. I just think, you know,
it was
I think in the, you know, sort of the
early 20th century, late 19th century,
um these were the things that like
represented like industrial might and
like successful country or whatever. Um
and then they never kind of like got out
of that uh sort of framework or
whatever. So, like when criticism of you
know, the the
Soviet Union um was that, you know, they
were really maybe good at sort of
building these like industrial things,
but they never managed to build like a
successful computer or anything like
that. They couldn't get out of their
sort of mindset. It's It's sort of maybe
easy to measure like success in terms of
like output or whatever. It's just like
relatively relatively simple commodity
that you can, Right. This physical thing
you can point to. Look at our steel
pile.
The more tons you have, the better
you've done. Um with more complex
things, maybe it doesn't you know, it's
not maybe so amenable to sort of this
like top-down management style. I don't
know, but uh those are some of my
theories. Let's get back to housing
because when we started and Tracy was
talking about the fact that si- even
setting aside the prefab stuff, and
you're talking about it, the actual
on-the-ground one-off, etc., home
building, it's
arguably uh
by some measure productivity has gone
backwards or maybe it's flat. Setting
aside like prefab, you mentioned
zoning regulations, etc. What is your
view for why just the normal sort of
style of housing
construction hasn't gotten any more
efficient over the of this in the book.
This goes to sort of the this the main
thesis of the book where I sort of break
down There's a specific points of
intervention that you can do in any
process to to make it cheaper. I've
talked about these a little bit. Um you
know, economies of scale. You can make
more of of what you're doing. Um you can
introduce some like fundamental new
technology. You know, an example of this
to talk about steel like the Bessemer
process for making steel which like
fundamentally was simpler and took less
inputs than the processes that that came
before it. Um so, I kind of break down
these different factors in the book of
like what you need to do um to make some
process more efficient. And if you can
do those things, your process can get
cheaper and you can sell it for less. Um
and if you can't do those things, you're
if, you know, you can't make the process
any cheaper. And all those basically
paths uh to improvement are either like
blocked or like very difficult to do in
construction. So, like we talked about
economies of scale, uh you know, that's
a big one. We talked a little bit about
risk aversion. It's hard to kind of
introduce like fundamentally new
technology. Uh the cost of your inputs
is like a big one, you know, the the the
materials and sort of energy and and and
labor that you're using uh in the
process. Those costs are hard to sort of
reduce in construction. Sort of
it's very hard to make building
materials any cheaper than they already
are and kind of in like, you know,
dollars per pound or dollars per like
cubic foot terms. Uh they're basically
as cheap as anything that civilization
produces. It's not easy to make those
things cheaper than they already are.
It's also hard to use less of them in a
way that doesn't make the house worse.
And so, all these paths are that you
have, you know, that a process can take
advantage of to sort of get less
expensive, uh they're all
very uh
difficult to do in construction.
I just remembered another question that
I always want to ask people and I feel
like you will also know the answer to
this one, which is why does America
build houses out of wood frames and
timber versus the rest of the world
where they tend to use a lot more cement
and concrete? Yeah, so the wood you
know, US has historically built a lot of
stuff out of wood because we had such
huge supplies of it.
In places like Europe a lot of those you
know large forest got cut down way
earlier and so they just didn't have the
huge huge supplies of of wood that that
the US had and so that kind of you know
shaped how the technology developed
because wood is very very inexpensive.
You can use it.
It's a very inexpensive way to sort of
build a house.
They do actually do sort of still timber
frame construction in in other parts of
the world. It's maybe not quite so
dominant, but it's like used in
you know the UK, Germany uses it.
Germany actually they have some like
prefab construction startups are made
using like timber frame timber panel
construction. It's used in a lot of the
Nordic countries that have a decent
amount of supply of wood. So it's not
like unheard of. It's it's most dominant
in like the US and in Canada, but in
other places that have a decent amount
of wood they tend to use it as well.
Should we completely give up on prefab
or major efficiency gains in housing in
the US or like are you still open to is
it just there's not a way to do this or
is there still out there some magic
bullet that's waiting to be found?
>> You should tell us what happened to the
company you were working for as well.
Yeah, so they yeah, they raised a huge
amount of money. Yeah, they they
basically after raising like several
billion dollars and building all these
factories to like you know mass produce
housing. They basically ended up
going bankrupt you know partly because
they were never able to you know sell
enough of these
you know buildings that they were trying
to sell. It's very hard to like pivot
your operations when you're like
invested in all this like physical
infrastructure.
And then COVID you know was kind of the
final nail in the coffin.
I'm not totally you know, I'm not
completely pessimistic. I mostly just
think if you're going to sort of try to
change the industry with with with
prefab, you need to have a very strong
thesis as to what specifically this time
is different and you know why it didn't
work previously and what is now is
changed. What constraints have been
relaxed that
will make it possible now. I don't have
you know any number of things could
change that. You know certain materials
get cheap enough.
It gets like inexpensive enough to build
a factory. You know any number of
things.
I personally I think that
very very good you know automation and
robotics have a good chance of of
changing this just because you know even
if nothing else were you know I'm not
the most creative person in the world.
You know I can't necessarily come up
with like some amazing new way of
putting a house together. But if even if
nothing else works, if you have like a
robot that costs $5,000 and like
basically duplicate you know 90 95% of
what a person can do. That would
effectively solve your problem, right?
You drop in these robots
and
and you build you know whatever it is
that you're trying to build using this
robotic much less expensive labor.
And I have a sort of
vignette in the in the conclusion of the
book as to what that might look like in
the future.
>> So we could get the the drones that go
up on the roof and fix leaks and stuff
like that. I anything's possible. All
right. Brian Potter, thank you so much
for coming on Odd Lots. Really
appreciate it. Thank you. It was great
to be here. Yeah, that was a lot of fun.
Thank you so much. Joe, that was a
really fun conversation.
>> Yeah, that was really fun. I love
Brian's stuff and I feel like it was one
of those conversations where both of us
could just ask a bunch of questions
we've been meaning to ask for a long
time.
>> I did read apparently his new book The
Origins of Efficiency has a bibliography
that's like 600 items long.
>> Amazing.
>> Which is incredible to think about him
pouring over like 600 different
reference sources.
>> We didn't get into it in this
conversation, but he's written about his
process before of like okay, I want to
learn about some new industry like
fighter jets or whatever it is and how
he goes about
diving into it etc. And yes, it seems
like As people who talk about stuff, I
should probably read that. Yeah,
totally. Speaking of which, I'm very
proud of us for not mentioning the word
deflator at all in a conversation about
housing productivity housing
construction productivity. I should just
mention that Richmond Fed paper that I
talked about in the intro their
conclusion was sort of an amalgamation
of all the factors that we talked about
in this conversation. So they basically
said they think that smaller
construction firms have reduced
incentives to invest in technological
innovation because you don't get that
economy of scale. And in fact, if you
look at areas with stricter zoning laws
and things like that, you can see that
they actually have even less
construction productivity than other
areas. Again, because like the
incentives and the economies of scale
just shrink and shrink and shrinks.
That's kind of interesting.
>> It would be interesting
something I was sort of curious about
during that is I wonder if if you just
look at one market where it's very flat
and dry. I was thinking about Arizona or
something like that. Like have they seen
productivity gains there especially
thinking about some of our conversations
with say Chase Emerson where okay,
there's there's one master plan and a
bunch of houses. We all have driven by
them that all look exactly the same. Do
you get those learning curves at least
on some limited effect? I would be
curious about that. I feel like to some
extent that is the story of the Sunbelt
states, right? You have cheaper houses
there because you can have these big
developments.
>> But it's scale. It's scale all the way
down. And so I like that point that he
made which is that you can identify the
sources of efficiency gains. Scale is
one. A scientific breakthrough such as
the Bessemer process in steel is another
one etc. But it they're not going to
they're not magic. They're not just
going to emerge. You know you probably
get some
some efficiency gains just from you know
repeatable process or a sales
labor force that gets better over time.
But by and large you're not just going
to the silver bullet isn't going to come
out of nowhere. And especially the fact
that there are all these sort of very
fundamental reasons why you can't have
scale or even the factories that build
the prefab homes cannot be a gigafactory
due to distribution costs. You see why
that you're running into that
constraint.
>> That's what I was thinking. It's like
the tyranny of of physics basically.
Like even though we have all these
technological breakthroughs
transportation has gotten cheaper over
time, you're still limited by geography
and the realities of you know real world
objects. And I guess that's why you can
have gigafactories for something like
chips which are really easy to send
abroad. They're tiny, but you can't do
it for something large. And I really am
I I curious about the sort of the point
about talent distribution and whether
there you know in the 1950s
the the for a certain type of
talent they the Boeing factory was the
best place they could have gone and now
now it was the cutting edge and now the
Boeing factory still more or less
resembles the Boeing factory of the
1950s with maybe similar pay scales
relative and so forth. Sure the nominal
pay has gone up a lot, but there are
just so many great opportunities to make
10 times or much more money elsewhere
and so that the sort of remaining talent
whether there's some you know whether
that has an effect on how well it can
operate. I'm very interested in.
>> what Boeing needs? Go on. They need like
a Mad Men style TV series that
glamorizes the aircraft manufacturing
process and gets people interested in it
again. Yeah, no that's a really good
idea.
>> All right, that's a free idea for
Boeing. Shall we leave it there? Let's
leave it there. All right, this has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at the Stalwart. And
if you enjoyed this conversation, then
please like, comment or subscribe to the
channel. Thanks for watching.
[Music]